## GNU Emacs: GNU project Emacs

GNU Emacs is a new version of Emacs, written by the author
of the original (PDP-10) Emacs, Richard Stallman. Its user
functionality encompasses everything other Emacs editors do,
and it is easily extensible since its editing commands are
written in Lisp.  (from etc/emacs.1)


## Mule [mju:l]: Multilingual Enhancement to GNU Emacs

Mule is a [MUL]tilingual [E]nhancement to GNU Emacs.  It can
handle not only ASCII characters (7 bits) and ISO Latin-1 (8
bits), but also Japanese, Chinese, Korean (16 bits) coded in
the ISO2022 standard and its variants (e.g. EUC, Compound
Text).


## Wnn: Japanese Kana to Kanji translator

Wnn consists of:
	jserver - a background server for translating Kana
		  string to Kanji-Kana mixed string.
	uum - a front end of jserver used on terminal.
	dictionary - quite big dictionary for the translation.
Wnn is distributed as a contribution software of X.V11R5
under the directory contrib/im/Xsi/Wnn.  The latest version
is 4.108.


## cWnn: Chinese PinYin/ZhuYin to Hanji translator

cWnn consists of:
	cserver - a background server for translating
		  PinYin/ZhuYin string to Hanji string
		  (for GB encoding).
	tserver - a background server for translating
		  PinYin/ZhuYin string to Hanji string
		  (for Big-5 encoding).
	cuum - a front end of cserver used on terminal.
	dictionary - quite big dictionary for the translation.
cWnn is distributed as a contribution software of X.V11R5
under the directory contrib/im/Xsi/cWnn.  The latest version
is 4.108.


## EGG: Japanese inputting methods on Mule

EGG provides two levels of user interface, one is to enter
Kana/PinYin string from ASCII keyboard (ITS level), and the
other is to tranlate Kana/PinYin string to Kanji/Hanzi
string (TAKANA level) while communicating with
jserver/cserver.

Using EGG on Mule corresponds to using uum/cuum on
kterm/cxterm, both uses jserver/cserver as background, but
EGG provides much more convenient interface when you are
running Mule.


## sj3: Japanese Kana to Kanji translator

'sj3' translates Japanese Kana string to Kanji-Kana mixed
string.  'sj3' runs on Sony NEWS workstations.  

When Mule is installed with EGG and SJ3, EGG communicate
with sj3serv instead of jserver/cserver.


## CANNA: Japanese Kana to Kanji translator

Canna converts kana to kanji based on a server-client model.
That is, an application program communicates with a
kana-to-kanji conversion server and achieves Japanese input.
Canna is distributed as a contribution software of X.V11R5
under the directory contrib/im/Canna.

When Mule is installed with CANNA, you can use Canna server
for inputting Japanese.


## Quail: Inputting method of multilingual characters in Mule

Quail system is bundled with Mule (quail.el) and provides inputting
methods of various character sets (quail-xxx.el).
For European:
	quail-latin.el, quail-greek.el, quail-cyrillic.el, quail-hebrew.el
For Chinese (corresponds to cxterm's *.cit):
	quail-ccdospy.el, quail-ctcps3.el, quail-etzy.el, quail-punct-b5.el,
	quail-punct.el, quail-py-b5.el, quail-py.el, quail-qj-b5.el,
	quail-qj.el, quail-sw.el, quail-tonepy.el, quail-zozy.el
For Korean:
	quail-hangul.el
For Japanese (tcode users):
	quail-tcode-dvorak.el, quail-tcode-qwerty.el


## kterm, cxterm, ixterm, exterm: Terminal emulators which runs on X

	kterm: Japanese version of 'xterm'.
	cxterm: Chinese version of 'xterm'.
	ixterm: European version of 'xterm'.
	exterm: multilingual version of 'xterm'.
			(Japanese/Chinese/Korean/European/et al)
Distributed as contribution softwares of X.V11R5 under the
directory contrib/clients.


## ISO2022: Code extension techniques of
	    ISO 7-bit and 8-bit coded character sets

ISO2022 is the International Standard of character code
encoding techniques.  It defines how to encode character
sets registered by ECMA.  Here we gives a very short essence
of these techniques.  See mule/doc/ISO2022 for more information.


## ECMA: European Computer Manufacturers Association

ECMA is engaged in administration of The International
Register for character sets.  Any character set can be a
candidate for registration so long as it satisfies the
technical requirements of ISO2022 and the format
requirements of ISO2375.


